so i'm going to prove a few theorems
about limits which will allow us to
compute limits um
or at least
you know we can use to prove that
other non-trivial limits exist using
these theorems
rather than using the definition
directly
so
this first
theorem
is
kind of the easiest theorem in the world
because
it's simply kind of just restating the
definition of convergence of
a sequence so
i'm going to state it
as follows so pretty short
that if i have
a sequence
x sub n
then it converges to x
if and only if
the
sequence obtained by taking the absolute
value of x of n minus x
equals zero
okay or the limit of that sequence is
zero
so what is the proof
it follows just immediately from the
definition
so i'm not even going to write anything
i'll leave it to you
but the proof follows from
the definition
and the simple fact that
x sub n minus x an absolute value
is equal to
the absolute value of the absolute value
of x of n minus x minus 0. okay
so
um
you know the definition says for all
epsilon positive you have to find an m
so that this is less than epsilon for
all n bigger than or equal to capital m
but if you found such a capital m for
this to be less than epsilon then this
will be less than epsilon which is
saying that this limit equals zero
and then going the other direction is
the same thing so this is just following
directly from the definition
um
and this simple fact
okay that was a very silly
fact about limits but a very useful one
in conjunction with
the next serum which is
not so trivial
which is the squeeze theorem
and it says the following so
let a n
b in
an xn
be
sequences
such that the following holds
for all n natural numbers
a sub n is less than or equal to x of n
is less than or equal to b sub n
and
a sub n and b sub n are convergent
sequences
so
and their limits
equal each other
and are given by some number call it x
then the conclusion
is that
the limit as n goes to infinity of x of
n equals x so when i write something
like this you should also kind of
there's kind of
half a sentence before that
that goes with this saying you know x
sub n is a convergent sequence and its
limit is equal to x all right so it's
kind of two statements in one
when i write that
um so
[Applause]
if you just
draw a picture the squeeze theorem
shouldn't be too surprising
so this is a little discussion
so here's x the common limit
of
a sub n and b sub n
and
so we can imagine that uh we're trying
to show the limit as n goes to infinity
of x of n equals x so that means we have
to find for every epsilon
capital m so that x sub n is between
x plus epsilon and x minus epsilon
so
if i go out a little bit
i would hope i can find a natural number
capital m so that
x of n minus x is or x sub n is in this
little interval
now if i'm assuming that a sub n and x
of n
if a sub n and b sub n are squeezing x
of n in other words x of n is between
the two
then and b sub n is converging to x then
um
for n
bigger than or equal to some integer m
zero
um
all of the
b sub n's are in this interval okay
maybe they're not there maybe they could
be over here
but the way i drew it is just to the
right of x okay
and likewise since a sub n is converging
to x there exists
some other integer m sub 1 so that if i
look at a sub n
it's also in this interval maybe it's
over here maybe it's
well it can't be to the right of b sub n
uh because that inequality up there um
strictly implies that a sub n is less
than or equal to b sub n
um
but it's in this interval
right
so then what would that have what would
that say
if i look at n bigger than or equal to m
plus
m 1 m 0 plus m 1
then n is bigger than both m 0
this guy and n is bigger than both m one
this guy and therefore if i look at x
sub n it's going to be between these two
and in particular it's going to be in
this interval
okay
so that's uh the proof in a picture and
now our goal is just to
to write it down
okay so that's that's the picture of of
the proof but you know if you're
actually trying to guess that why this
would be true i mean the b sub bins you
can imagine are are getting very close
to x
the a sub n's are also getting very
close to x
x sub n is in between the two so it's
getting squeezed to x and that's the
that's the name
all right
okay um
so now we just need to turn this into
written word so we need to show we're
going to show that x sub n converges to
x
um so we're all we have is an epsilon
delta proof
um or we could use uh that theorem but
let's go with an epsilon delta proof
i mean not epsilon delta epsilon epsilon
m
epsilon delta proofs will come later
so let epsilon be positive
and
since b sub n converges to x
there exists a m sub zero in natural
numbers
such that for all n bigger than or equal
to m sub zero
um
b sub n
minus x is less than epsilon
an absolute value which
is the same as
saying well i mean it's not the same but
it implies that b sub n is less than
x plus epsilon
since a sub n is converged to x as well
there exists an m sub 1
natural number
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to m1
a sub n minus x and absolute value is
less than epsilon
which implies
a sub n is between x minus epsilon and x
plus epsilon but i'm only going to use
one of those inequalities so
okay
[Applause]
now i'm going to choose the capital m
for my sequence x sub n that i'm trying
to show converges to x
so choose m to be
m sub 0 plus m sub 1. i mean you could
have chosen it to be the maximum of the
two
but this works just fine as well
then
if n is bigger than or equal to m
this implies n is bigger than or equal
to m0
and n is bigger than or equal to m1
which implies that both of these
inequalities here are valid
for this n
so then
x minus epsilon is less than a sub n
which by assumption is less than or
equal to
x sub n
which is less than or equal to b sub n
which is less than
x plus epsilon
now these string of inequalities
therefore tell us that x minus epsilon
is less than x of n is less than
x plus epsilon
which is
equivalent to saying the absolute value
of x
sub n minus x
is less than epsilon and therefore
x sub n converges to x
so these two
facts together
kind of give us a very robust and short
way to prove
limits of sequences
so for example let me give you a
simple one
let's show the limit as n goes to
infinity of n squared over n squared
plus n
plus 1
equals 1.
so
i mean this
is a very simple limit to use these
theorems on but in practice um you know
you don't always have just a simple
expression like this
um
okay so
and we'll use these two theorems in
conjunction to prove some other theorems
here in a minute but let's just see it
in action once
um
let me look at
so
this
sequence converges to one if and only if
the absolute value of the difference
converges to zero so let's look at the
absolute value of the difference
this is equal to now just doing the
algebra this is equal to
and
taking absolute values gives me
n plus one over n squared
plus n plus one
and this is less than or equal to this
one is making things bigger so i can
drop it and this is less than or equal
to n
plus one over
n squared plus n now n squared plus n i
can factor into n times n plus one so
then that cancels with this n plus one
on top
and i just get one over n
so
zero is less than or equal to
n squared over n squared plus n plus 1
minus 1
which is less than or equal to
1 over n
now 1 over n we've shown
using epsilon delta proof i mean epsilon
m proof we've shown 1 over n converges
to 0.
so since
zero converges to zero the left side
and one over n converges to zero the
right side
that implies by the squeeze theorem
n squared over n squared plus n plus one
minus one converges to zero
by the squeeze theorem
which implies that
n squared over n squared plus n plus 1
converges to 1
by that first theorem
okay
now you can imagine that instead of
having this at your disposal
i asked you to do
an epsilon proof epsilon m proof of this
statement
then you would have taken this and
played with it just like we did here
and gotten to one over n
and therefore if this is less than
epsilon that would imply this is less
than epsilon
so you would choose capital m to be
so that one over capital m is less than
epsilon but
using these two theorems kind of saves
us some
a little work and a little time
okay
now
so at the end of the lecture last time
we discussed the notion of subsequences
and we showed that
limiting limits and subsequences
interact
nicely meaning
if i have a convergent sequence then
every subsequence converges to the same
thing
um
so
now a natural question is how do limits
interact with the order of the real
numbers
okay um
right r has this uh these two
fundamental properties about it that um
it's
so first off that it has the least upper
bound property and also that it's a uh
an ordered field
so first natural question is how does
this definition of limit convergence um
interact with the order
[Music]
so this first theorem states
or this theorem that kind of answers
this question is the following is that
limit limits respect order
basically
so if
xn
yn
are
convergent sequences
and
for all n
x n is less than or equal to y n
then what should be the conclusion the
limit as n goes to infinity so what i
said a minute ago as limits respect
inequality then i should be able to take
the limits of both sides and still have
this inequality
then
limit as n goes to infinity is less than
or equal to the limit
as n goes to infinity of y sub n
and
the simple corollary that follows from
this
is that
if x event is a
convergence sequence
and for all in a natural number
you have two numbers
uh
a and b such that a sub n is less than
or equal to
or a is less than or equal to x of n is
less than or equal to b
then
this implies that
the limit of x sub n is also between
a and b
okay
let me say
something very brief about
what this says and doesn't say
[Applause]
so what does this not say
um
you may lose a strict inequality meaning
what
it can be the case that x sub n is less
than y sub n for all n but the limit of
x of n equals the limit of y sub n
okay so simply having less than x sub n
less than y sub n does not imply the
limit of x sub n is less than the limit
of y sub n
all right so what do i mean by this
this does not imply that
the limit
is less than y sub n
now at this point in class i would ask
somebody to give me a counter example
so at this point i'm going to take
a bite of my cookie
and let you think about that
i didn't have to take a bite in my
cookie you could have just paused the
video and thought about it
but then i wouldn't get a bite of my
cookie
okay
so what's an example of two sequences
that satisfy this
but don't satisfy this
if x of n equals 0 for all n
and y sub n equals 1 over n
right
then
x sub n is less than y sub n for all n
and what's the limit
x have been well that's just zero
and we've
and before the limit of y sub n that's
just zero and these two things equal
each other this is not less than that
okay so i just want to make that that
small point
it could pop up as a small question on
one of the midterms
i should say the midterm and
possibly the final
all right
so let's prove uh
let's prove one two follows immediately
from one right um
for two we simply take
you know for example the upper
inequality x of n is less than or equal
to b we take y sub n to be the constant
sequence b
and
um for the other one we would take
the bigger sequence to be x sub n and
the smaller sequence to be the constant
sequence a so two follows immediately
from one so we're just going to do one
okay
and we haven't done a proof by
contradiction in a while so why not do
it by contradiction
um okay so the proof uh
let's label these sequences so i don't
have to write
um
limit as n goes to infinity and limit of
x of n and limit as n goes to infinity
of y sub n so much
so let's call their limits x and y
and what we want to show
x is less than or equal to y
right that's our goal and we're going to
prove this by contradiction
that is let's assume y is less than x
and arrive at a false statement
which contradicts our
setting or assumptions that we have
assume y
is less than x
now
um
let me draw a picture here to go along
with what's
going to happen
so if y
is less than x
yeah
all of the y sub n's have to be near y
as a if i go far enough out and all the
exit bins have to be near x as long as i
go far enough out
right so that would contradict
eventually the fact that the x sub n's
are supposed to be less than or equal to
the y sub n's right if y is less than x
and let's say i go out
let's say half the distance between y
and x
so this is
if you like the
midpoint and all the y sub n's are here
and all the x bins
are here and the y sub n's
are here then i cannot have x sub n less
than or equal to y sub n which is my
assumption right
which is the assumption in my in my
theorem
okay
now i i
maybe i should have written this here
sometimes it's good to to reiterate what
your assumptions are suppose we're all
in x is less than or y sub n
and
like that and so the thing we're trying
to show is is this okay so we assume
the negation of this and arrive at a
contradiction
uh
to the things we're assuming or just a
general
um true facts
um
yeah i had to had to add the word true
on the facts because there like i said
at some point there's alternative facts
flying around out there
okay
so this picture we're going to turn this
into a proof
so
since y n converges to y
exists a natural number m sub
sub zero such that
for all n
bigger than or equal to m sub zero
y sub n minus y
is less than
x minus y over 2. now that's a positive
number because we're assuming
x is bigger than y
all right
and by the definition of limit
given any positive number i can find an
integer so that for all n bigger than or
equal to that integer this thing is less
than that small number and i'm just
choosing that small number to be this
very special small number because
that's going to
help me arrive at a contradiction
since xn converges to x there exists a
m1 natural number
such that for all n
bigger than or equal to m1
x sub n minus x is less than
the same thing
okay so this is
um
putting into a precise form what i was
saying that all the x bins need to be
close to x eventually and all the y sub
n's need to be close to y eventually and
how eventually well eventually enough so
that
i'm in these two
disjoint intervals
okay
let n be
m sub 0 plus m sub 1
then
n is bigger than or equal to m sub 0 and
n is bigger than or equal to m sub 1. so
both of these inequalities are valid
for this n
and what does this mean
well then that implies that y sub n
so let me um
tack on one more inequality just by
removing the absolute values
this uh
and adding y this tells me y sub n is
less than
x plus y over two
and this tells me
x of n is less than
or the other way sorry
well
we'll just write this down here so then
y sub n
is less than
y plus x minus y over 2 which equals
x plus y over 2
which equals x minus
x minus y over 2
and this is less than
x sub n
right by the second inequality so this
follows
from the first inequality
this follows from the second inequality
right
which implies for this specific n y sub
n is less than
x sub n and this is a contradiction to
our assumption
that y sub n is bigger than or equal to
x sub n for all n
okay so we had just found based on this
this assumption here that
uh we arrive at a contradiction to our
other assumptions and therefore
this must be false
so
that's how limits interact with
inequalities
so if i have two sequences one bigger
than the other then the limits respect
that inequality um
that has to deal with the order part of
r being an ordered field so what about
the field part of r being an ordered
field so how
does uh
limits
interact with algebraic
operations
all right
uh quite well it turns out so what's the
theorem
so suppose i have two convergent
sequences
limit as n goes to infinity of x of n
equals x
and
limit as n goes to infinity of y sub n
equals y
then
several things hold
the first is that
again you should kind of read this as
two statements written in one the limit
as n goes to infinity of x of n plus y
sub n
so this is a new sequence that i form by
just taking the term by term sum of
these two things
um
this sequence this new sequence is
convergent and the limit equals the sum
of the limits
okay
the second is
all seeing r
the limit as n goes to infinity of the
new sequence obtained by taking every
entry of the sequence x sub n and
multiplying it by this fixed number c
the limit of that product is the product
of
c and x
so limits respect what one would call
scalar multiplication
but we could be more general than that
c you can think of as just
one example of a convergent sequence
just a constant sequence but in general
we have that
the product of two convergent sequences
is convergent
and
the limit of the product is the product
of the limit
and finally if we have something for
write it over here
if we have something for
a
product then perhaps we have something
by a quotient and that's as long as we
can divide things so
if for all n
y sub n does not equal 0
and the limit
y does not equal 0
then
limit of the quotient x sub n over y sub
n
is the quotient of the limits
okay
[Applause]
um
okay so
we're gonna prove uh
we're gonna prove this first one using
this this
scheme of using both this
simple theorem about limits and the
squeeze theorem
and it's quite simple so
we just use the triangle inequality
by the triangle inequality 0 is less
than or equal to
x sub n plus y sub n
x plus y
and x sub n minus x y sub n minus y and
then i use the triangle inequality i get
x of n minus x plus
y sub n
o
you know it scratched that
because in fact
i was trying to be too clever
and would have ended up using the
theorem to prove the theorem so let's
not do that it's never good to use the
theorem you're trying to prove to prove
the theorem that you're trying to prove
so let's go back to basics and
use the definition
let epsilon be positive
um
so
since x sub n converges to x
there exists a natural number m
such
that we're all n bigger than or equal to
m naught
x of n minus x
it's supposed to be m but it looks like
a k
less than epsilon over two y the two
well you see in a minute um
and similarly for the sequence y there
exists
in one natural number
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to m one
y sub n minus y is less than epsilon
over two
so i have these two integers
which are given to me by the fact that x
of n converges to x
y sub n converges to y
um
and the definition of convergence
i can always find these two integers for
any small tolerance and i'm choosing the
tolerance to be epsilon over 2 for some
reason which you'll see in a minute
and so what is the integer
capital m that i choose for this epsilon
for the sequence x sub n plus y sub n
i'm going to choose m to be
m not plus m1
and now i need to show that this choice
of m works
and if n is bigger than or equal to m
this implies that n is
bigger than or equal to m0 and
m is bigger than or equal to m1 so both
of these inequalities are valid for this
n
and therefore i get
x of n plus y sub n
minus
x plus y
and now i do what i was going to do a
minute ago when i was going to use the
theorem to prove the theorem x sub n
minus x y sub n minus y i group those
together and then i use the triangle
inequality this is less than or equal to
x of n minus x
[Applause]
plus y sub n minus y
and now this is less than epsilon over
two this is less than epsilon over two
so
equals epsilon and now you can see why i
chose the two because i wanted to show
this was less than epsilon and i had
control over these two things
and the sum of controls
gives me epsilon so i choose the control
to be epsilon over two if i had three
sequences
then you could probably guess i would
choose epsilon over three meaning if i
had a
xc sequences xn y sub n and z sub n and
i looked at the sum x sub n plus y sub n
plus z sub n
i could show that converges to the sum
of the limits and i would choose
these integers m sub 0 m sub 1 m sub 2
so that i have epsilon over 3 here so
that they sum up to epsilon
um
okay
[Applause]
so
now we prove too
that uh for this
single scalar multiplication if you like
where you just multiply each term by a
single number
the limit respects that multiplication
do
an epsilon proof again
since x sub n converges to x so now
we're trying to show that second limit
there exists
m sub 0 a natural number
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to m sub
x of n
minus x is less than
epsilon over the absolute value of c
plus one
okay
and now you have to trust me
why that thing well you'll see it'll
come out just like this did
so for the sequence uh
c times x sub n we'll choose m to be
just this m sub zero
then
if n is bigger than or equal to m so m
which is equal to m sub zero
this implies this inequality holds
and therefore
c times x of n minus x c times x
this c pops out of the absolute value
and becomes the absolute value of c
times the absolute value of x of n minus
x
and which is less than so i'm writing
less than here but this thing is less
than that i'm not
is less than
c
over
c plus one
epsilon
okay now this uh
quotient here
this number over
this
uh number plus one is always less than
one
so this positive number which is less
than one or non-negative number which is
less than one
is going to be less than 1 times epsilon
which gives me epsilon
and maybe you're wondering
why didn't i choose
so this is just
a little
smidgen of sophistication not much just
a little okay
why didn't i choose this so that epsilon
it's epsilon over the absolute value of
c so that when i stick in
uh my any quality for this guy i just
get epsilon
well what if c equals zero so then i'm
telling you to choose
capital m sub zero so that the absolute
value of x of n minus x is less than
epsilon over zero division by zero is a
no-no okay
but if we fudge it a little by adding
one
we get something that's uh still does
the job it still gives me
some number which is
non-negative and less than one
um which is enough
okay
so
let's prove that the limit of the
product is the product of the limits
since the sequence y sub n converges to
y it's a convergent sequence and
therefore it's bounded
that means that there exists
some non-negative
real number b
such that for all
natural numbers in
y sub n is less than or equal to b an
absolute value
okay
then
if i look at x sub n times y sub n minus
x times y
and i add and subtract um
x
times y sub n
i can write this as
plus um
right
and now i use the triangle inequality
that this is less than or equal to
x sub n minus x times y sub n
plus
y sub n minus
y times absolute value of x
and y sub n is bounded by b for all n so
this is less than or equal to
plus
y sub n minus y times the absolute value
of x
okay
now
let me just state the obvious that we
get 0 is less than or equal to
x of n times y sub n minus x times y
and this is less than or equal to
as we've shown here
plus
x times
y sub n minus y
um
now the right hand side so the left side
of this inequality converges to zero
the right side also converges to zero
because we've just shown by one and two
by two this converges to zero
and by that theorem since x n converges
to x
this product here converges to zero b is
a fixed number
and the same thing for this
that converges to zero
and therefore
by two
this
sum converges to zero
okay so these two arrows are by
two
and this is by one
so me just summarize by one
and two
the right-hand side
of this inequality
b times x of n minus x
plus
an absolute value of x times
y sub n minus y
this converges to zero
which
by the squeeze theorem
implies that
this is by
squeeze theorem
which implies that x sub n times y sub n
converges to x times y
by that first theorem okay so i'm not
going to keep referring to that first
theorem because i'm just going to it's
such a simple fact i'm just going to
keep
using it without referencing it namely
that the sequence an x a sequence
converges to x if and only if the
absolute value of this thing
uh this difference converges to zero
okay
all right so that proves the
limit of the product is the product of
the limits
now for the quotient
we can use
three
once we've proven it for just one over y
sub n right
so
what do i mean
so now we're assuming
that y sub n is not equal to 0
for all n and y does not equal 0. okay
so if we prove
this statement that the limit as n goes
to infinity of y one over y sub n equals
one over y
then
by three
implies
at the limit as n goes to infinity of
x sub n over y sub n equals
x over y because x sub n over y sub n is
just the product of x sub n and one over
y sub n
okay so we just need to prove
this special case if you like
and we're going to do it kind of the
same way now because we're dividing by
y
sub n
so here we use that we had an upper
bound for the product here
but when we take one over y sub n to get
an upper bound of that
means we need
sort of a low we need a lower bound on y
sub n on the absolute values of y sub n
and we get that by our assumption that
uh the limit is non-zero for all n and
so is the y sub
n's so
first thing we prove or or let me write
this as a claim
there exists a positive number b little
b
that
for all natural numbers in
y sub n is bigger than or equal to b
okay
and we know that a sequence is bounded
so we know that there's always a capital
b so that absolute value of y sub n is
bigger than or is less than or equal to
b but for sequences that are
uh
non-zero and converging to a non-zero
limit then
you can bound them um
away from
from zero
um and it's kind of the same proof that
we
gave for showing that a convergent
sequence is
bounded uh above
so
let me draw a quick picture
and let's assume that the limit is
positive just for the sake of the
picture
so this is a little discussion on why
this is true and this picture is going
to look
at least the explanation is going to be
kind of similar to
um
why a sequence is bounded and this one
is why it's
kind of bounded below
uh so let's assume that the limit y is
positive
and let's say i go out
uh
within distance
let's say y over 2 so that i'm still
positive so this is
y minus
y over 2 absolute value so in this
picture y is positive so that's just
equal to
y over 2.
then what uh what can i say that
eventually
all of the y sub n's
are here
in this interval away from zero and in
fact their absolute value
is bounded by
y over 2. so let me just write it that
way
so all the y sub n's for n bigger than
or equal to some m all have to lie in
this interval because they're converging
to y and y is
positive and therefore an absolute value
they're all bounded above below i mean
by y over two they're all uh at least
distance y over two to zero
okay and then all that's left to handle
are
maybe some definitely many um that are
left
um
y sub one y sub two
y sub m minus one
that are scattered
uh on the real line
but are nonzero okay so we're just going
to end up taking the minimum of this
number
and the absolute value of these numbers
okay
okay um
so
since the y sub n is converged to y
and y
does not equal zero
there exists
an integer
m
such that
all n bigger than or equal to capital m
so this picture was uh why this claim is
true it was not the proof of why this
claim is true what i'm writing now is
the actual proof of why this claim is
true um
such that for all n bigger than or equal
to capital m
y sub n minus y
and absolute value is less than
y over two okay so for this picture i
drew where y is positive that would have
just been y over 2
but you have to use a absolute value for
the other case that y is is negative
because this has to be a positive number
then
for all n bigger than or equal to m
this
inequality and the triangle inequality
gives me so if i look at
the absolute value of y this is equal to
absolute value of y minus y sub n plus y
sub n and now i use a triangle
inequality
which is less than this is less than
y over 2
plus
y sub n
and i started off with the absolute
value of y
so when i subtract that over
that tells me that
the absolute value of y over 2
is less than
absolute value
of y sub n for all n bigger than or
equal to capital m
okay
so then i let b
to be
the minimum of
several numbers
you know i'm writing min but i should
write inf but
so if you like
let me write
inf
of
y1
y
m minus 1
and
y over 2.
and by what you are doing on the
assignment i think it was assignment two
this imp always exists in a finite set
right this is a finite set of uh
positive numbers
and therefore it's emphem exists as one
of these elements one of these
m numbers is the infimum
and they're all positive so this is a
positive number
and so then
simply how this number is defined it
follows
that
we're all in
y sub n is bigger than or equal to cap
is bigger than or equal to b
okay
right because
again if n is between little n is
between one and capital m minus one then
certainly that any that the absolute
value of that thing is bigger than or
equal to the smaller of all of these
right
which is bigger than or equal to b
and if n is bigger than or equal to
capital m then we proved over here that
y sub n is bigger than
the absolute value of y over two
which is bigger than or equal to the
minimum of these numbers and y over two
which equals b so
all right so that proves the claim
that proves the claim but we haven't
proved what we wanted to yet that the
limit as n goes to infinity of one over
y sub n equals one over y
um but this follows
almost immediately from
what we've done so far
so
now we're going to use the claim to
prove it so we look at
compute that
0 is less than or equal to
1 over y sub n minus 1 over y
we're going to show that this goes to 0
using those two theorems
and so by algebra that's equal to
and using the absolute value this is 1
over y sub n minus y
i mean the absolute value of y sub n
minus y over
absolute value of y sub n
absolute value of y
now y sub n is bigger than or equal to b
so this is less than or equal to
1 over
b
times y
times
y sub n minus y
yeah
so just to summarize we've shown that 0
is less than
1 over y sub n minus 1 over y
is less than 1 over
b times 1 over or b times the absolute
value of y times
y sub n minus y
now
this goes to 0
because it's just a constant sequence
this
converges to zero because
y sub n minus y and absolute value goes
to zero this is just a fixed number
times that and by what we've proven for
um
two this product converges to zero
so
by the squeeze theorem we get that
one over y sub n
this converges to zero
which implies
okay
so another big property about the real
numbers that we proved after we stated
the existence of the real numbers
which
remember was this is defined as this
ordered field with the least upper bound
property
we proved that the square root of 2
exists
as a real number
there was really nothing special about 2
in fact you could prove that the square
root of
x exists as a real number for any x
that's a
positive or non-negative number
so the square root of a real number is
well defined see
it's
um
or the square root of a non-negative
number is well-defined
and always exists as a real number
so you can
ask
how does
uh
limits interact with square roots
and they interact just as you think they
should
if i have a sequence so that for all n x
of n is bigger than or equal to zero
and
it's a convergent sequence converging to
some number x then
the limit of the square roots of these
guys equals
the square root of the limit
okay
now i want you to
just take a second here and and
understand that this this is a
meaningful statement because
since the x sub bends are all
non-negative by
a theorem that let's see did i erase it
already
the one that had to deal with limits and
limits and the order so since the x sub
n's are all non-negative that implies
that x is non-negative so that this
square root is meaningful okay
so first check whenever somebody says
here's this theorem
or
this theorem is uh
i think the serum is true
is um
to check to make sure that this uh that
a theorem is meaningful
so
let's prove this so there's two cases to
consider
x is equal to zero or x is non-zero so
let's do the first case
so the limit is zero so we'll do this
proof uh
using the definition of limits
meaning the epsilon m
definition
so we want to show that the limit of the
square root of x sub n equals 0.
so let epsilon be positive
and since
x sub n converges to
exists
natural number m sub 0
such that
if n is bigger than or equal to m 0 then
x sub n minus the limit which is just
uh
you know
0 and taking the absolute value which is
just x of n
which is equal to x of n because x of n
is not negative
is less than
epsilon squared
okay remember i can always find no
matter what
is underneath my hand since x sub n
converges to zero i can find a natural
number so that that thing is less than
what's underneath my hand and the thing
that i'm going to have underneath my
hand that's going to make things work
out for the square root is epsilon
squared
okay
choose m to be m sub 0.
so i'm going to show this m works for
the sequence square root of x of n
and if n is bigger than or equal to m
the square root of x sub n
minus 0 which is just
x sub n
now it's also so we didn't strictly
speaking prove this but it's not um
you know too hard to show that square
roots respect
inequalities so x sub n is less than
epsilon squared so the square root is
less than epsilon squared
which equals epsilon
okay
so the second case
is
x not equal to 0
and to do this case we'll use those two
theorems
again
so
and let's look at
square root of x sub n minus square root
of x
now if i
uh
write this as
i multiply top and bottom
by x of n plus absolute or square root
of x
square root of x sub n plus square root
of x which is a positive number it's
fine to divide by it as well
because x is non-zero
so here not just non-zero it's positive
because x has to be non-negative
now this is the product of something
minus something else
with something plus something else so
then that's going to be the difference
of the squares so that's equal to
over and
again these are positive numbers so that
they come out of the absolute value
and
this is non-negative so in fact it's
only making things bigger on the bottom
and therefore things smaller overall so
this is less than or equal to
just if i replace this by square root of
x
okay
so what did i prove
1 over square root of x
all right and
so by assumption x of n converges to x
so this goes to zero this is a fixed
number multiplied by this thing going to
zero so by
um number two and the theorem we proved
before this whole product converges to
zero okay so and of course this
converges to zero so this thing in the
middle must converge to zero by the
squeeze theorem
all right
okay
so
that's the square root
and
let me just remark
um
that
so this
number three up here that the limit of
the product is a product of the limits
this thus implies that the limit of xn
squared converges to x squared so the
square
of x sub n converges to the square of
the limit and by induction you can show
that the cube
fourth power fifth power of x sub n
converges to the fourth power fifth
power of x okay
and not only that you can also prove
um
so i'm not going to do this
and i'm not going to force you to either
but just know these as facts
that i don't have to just take the
square root i could take the kth root so
um
and this statement still is true that if
x of n is bigger than or equal to 0 for
all n
and i have a
a limit then the kth root of x of n
converges to the kth root of x
so the final
theorem we'll prove for today which will
conclude our
facts about limits is
you know we have um
i mean we've been using this all along
although i haven't made special
attention about it you know the real
numbers there this again like i said an
ordered field with the least upper bound
property
so we've seen how
uh limits interact with
um
you know this structure of the real
numbers but they also have a distance
associated to them right the absolute
value the distance from two numbers a
and b
uh
is the absolute value of a minus b
um
or the distance from a number
to 0 is just the absolute value of that
number
so one could ask
how does the limit
interact with this additional structure
of the absolute value
okay and so
just like everything's been good so far
with limits
uh it's the same with the absolute value
namely that limits respect absolute
value
so
if x of n is
convergent sequence
limit x
then the sequence of absolute values is
also a convergent sequence
and the limit as n goes to infinity
of
the absolute values equals
the absolute value of the limit okay now
let me again let's let's um
try to think a little more
deeply about this real quick
if i have a convergent sequence and the
absolute values converge
does the converse hold if the absolute
values converge does this imply that the
original sequence converges and the
answer is of course no
well not of course i didn't even give
you a minute to think about it but
why is the converse not true
so let me make this a mark
converse is not true
because you could look at x sub n equals
minus 1 to the n
right
then
the absolute values of these guys
converges but the original sequence does
not converge
okay
so
this is a one-way street uh
for
convergence and convergence of the
absolute values
[Applause]
um so before i prove this theorem let me
just prove a quick uh
um
inequality which i think i said i was
going to put on the assignment and then
forgot to put on the assignment but
you should know it so this theorem is
the reverse triangle inequality
which states for all
a b
real number the absolute value of the
difference in absolute values
is less than or equal to
the absolute value of the difference
okay so the proof of
this reverse triangle inequality
just uses the the original triangle
inequality
so
the absolute value of a
this is equal to the absolute value of a
minus b
plus b and this is less than or equal to
the absolute value of
a minus b plus absolute value of b
and thus
the absolute value of
a minus the absolute value of b is less
than or equal to
the absolute value of a minus b now
these are just two numbers i mean two
letters reverse the letters
in this argument replace a with b
and b with a so then
i get b minus the absolute value
the absolute value of b minus the
absolute value of a is less than or
equal to
the absolute value of b minus a which is
the same as this
and
therefore
let me multiply through
by minus 1
and that tells me
okay so
i have this is less than or equal to the
absolute value of a minus b i also have
it's bigger than or equal to minus the
absolute value of a minus b
[Applause]
and therefore the absolute value of a
minus the absolute value of b
is less than or equal to
absolute value of a minus b
so i know it's taboo to write on the
very back board but i'm going to do it
anyway
so that was the proof of the reverse
triangle inequality here's the proof of
the theorem
before it
it just follows from the reverse
triangle inequality and
one in in that
combination of those two theorems over
there
we have that the absolute value
of x of n minus the absolute value
of x
this is less than or equal to by the
reverse triangle inequality the absolute
value of n x of n minus x
so this is by
reverse triangle
inequality
and by assumption
this converges to 0
as n goes to infinity
okay
so by the squeeze theorem
this goes to 0 and therefore
the absolute value of x sub n converges
to the absolute value of x
and
that's it for
that proof for this lecture and for this
week